---
layout: post
title:  "iGEM Groningen 2021: Bye-Monia"
date:   2021-10-27 15:34:10 +0200
categories: portfolio update
author: Ritten Roothaert
---

{% include image.html max-width="200px" 
file="https://static.igem.org/mediawiki/2021/1/17/T--Groningen--LogoByeMonia.png" 
alt="Bye-Monia logo"
align="center" 
caption="Logo of the iGEM Groningen 2021 team: Bye-Monia"%}

<!-- excerpt-start -->
 
In 2021, I was a part of the [iGEM team of Groningen][iGEM-home-page]. iGEM is a global 
competition focusing on finding solutions to local societal problems 
using synthetic microbiology. For our iGEM project, our team decided 
to contribute to mitigating the Dutch nitrogen crisis. This crisis is a 
result of the Netherlands emitting too much nitrogen containing 
compounds into the air. Once in the air, these compounds are deposited 
into nature reserves where they cause eutrophication and acidification, 
resulting in a loss of biodiversity in these areas. Our project was 
eventually nominated for 5 awards, including [best model][model-page] and [best 
project presentation][project-presentation]. We reached top 10 within 
the overgraduate category and, as icing on top of the cake, we won the 
best environmental project in the overgraduate category.

<!-- excerpt-end -->

One of the main emitters of nitrogen containing compounds is the Dutch 
agricultural industry, with the cattle industry in particular emitting 
almost half of the total ammonia emissions within the Netherlands.
We decided to modify a Saccharomyces spp. such that it is able to 
excrete alpha-amylase. This enzyme hydrolyses glycosidic bonds in 
complex sugars. We reasoned that by adding this enzyme to the feed of 
cattle, the animal would be better able to digest polysaccharides, 
increasing the digestive efficiency and cause it to excrete less ammonia.

 
In order to maximize the activity of the alpha-amylase excreted by our 
alpha-amylase producing Saccharomyces spp. (from now on also referred to 
as our ‘device’), we looked at the effect of 10 different promoters, 4 
secretion signals, 4 alpha-amylase genes and 4 chassis, creating a 
combinatorial library with 640 different combinations of parts. We set 
out to test 64 of these combinations and use machine learning (ML) in 
order to make predictions on the untested combinations. The tool used 
for this is called the automated recommendation tool (ART). The 
predictions made by this tool were both exploratory, giving an 
indication on which combinations should be tested in order to reduce the 
uncertainty within the ML model, and exploitative, giving an indication 
on which combinations are expected to yield the highest activity based 
on the training data. Designing and analysing the ML approach to our 
project was one of my main contributions to the project.

In the end, we managed to produce usable activity measures for 47 
devices. After training the ART, it became apparent that using one 
specific secretion signal and one alpha-amylase gene would most likely 
result in the highest activity. Furthermore, one promoter also appeared 
to be outcompeting the others. No clear preference for chassis was 
observed, and thus we decided to use the chassis which showed the 
highest growth rate. Unfortunately, we did not have enough time to test 
the final device and verify the predictions made by the model.
 
Besides wet and dry lab work, our team also put substantial efforts in 
outreach, both in the form of [human practice (HP)][human-practice] and in the form of 
[education][education]. With our human practice work, reached out to stakeholders and 
used their advice in order to make adjustments to our product such that 
their needs are taken into account. My role in this part of the project 
was supporting Milou, as she was our HP manager. This support consisted 
of brainstorming with her, filling in various HP tools, reaching out to 
stakeholders and conducting stakeholder interviews. 

For the education part of our project, our education team created 
[several comics][comics] aimed at teaching elementary school children (aged 6 to 
12) basic concepts within synthetic biology, along with a lesson plan on 
how to use these comics in a classroom setting. Additionally, several 
webpages were created where the actual science behind each of the comics 
is explained. These webpages targeted an older audience, mainly 
focussing on the parents of the elementary school children. Besides 
translating some materials and brainstorming on how to set up the 
webpages, my contribution to this part of the project was limited.

My final contribution to the project was being in charge of the 
finances. I made the budget, kept track of our income and expenses, 
directed sponsoring requests to Chienes from the GBB, and explained to 
the other team members how they can declare the expenses they made for 
the project.


[iGEM-home-page]: https://2021.igem.org/Team:Groningen
[model-page]: https://2021.igem.org/Team:Groningen/Model
[project-presentation]: https://video.igem.org/w/5om7x44MZ3weFFBqABZ3DH
[human-practice]: https://2021.igem.org/Team:Groningen/Gold_Human_Practices
[education]: https://2021.igem.org/Team:Groningen/Communication
[comics]: https://2021.igem.org/Team:Groningen/education/comics_en
